.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Abdelkader Boudih <freebsd@seuros.com>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 2, 2026
.Dt COREBOOT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm coreboot
.Nd coreboot firmware table driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device coreboot"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
coreboot_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides access to firmware tables created by the coreboot
open-source firmware project.
It discovers the coreboot table by scanning low memory for the
.Dq LBIO
signature, follows any forward pointer to the real table in high memory,
and validates the IP-style checksums.
.Pp
The driver exposes firmware information through three interfaces:
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/coreboot_console"
.It Sy sysctl
A
.Xr sysctl 8
tree under
.Va hw.coreboot
provides access to:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
firmware version, build date, and compiler information
.It
mainboard identification and board configuration
.It
MAC addresses, framebuffer, GPIO, and SPI flash details
.It
TPM information and SMMSTORE configuration
.It
ACPI RSDP address, PCIe controller base, and TSC frequency
.It
boot timestamps and CBMEM entry enumeration
.El
.It Pa /dev/coreboot_console
A character device providing read-only access to the CBMEM firmware console
ring buffer.
This contains coreboot's own boot log, analogous to
.Xr dmesg 8
but for the firmware stage before the OS kernel starts.
The ring buffer uses bit 31 of its cursor as an overflow indicator;
when set, the buffer has wrapped and data is read starting from the
cursor position.
.It Pa /dev/cbmem
A character device providing
.Xr ioctl 2
access to individual CBMEM entries.
CBMEM is coreboot's mechanism for passing data between firmware stages
and to the operating system.
.El
.Ss Verbose Output
By default, the driver prints a single attach summary line showing table
location and size.
.Pp
When
.Va bootverbose
is set
.Pq e.g., Dq Li boot -v ,
the driver additionally prints firmware identity and parsed hardware details
such as mainboard, board config, MAC count, ACPI RSDP, SPI flash, framebuffer,
GPIO, and TPM summary.
.Pp
When
.Va hw.coreboot.debug
is non-zero, the driver prints extra internal diagnostics such as SMMSTORE,
timestamp, TPM CB log, and FMAP addresses.
.Pp
All sysctl nodes are registered regardless of verbosity settings.
.Ss sysctl Variables
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available when the driver is loaded
(variables only appear if the corresponding table record exists):
.Bl -tag -width "hw.coreboot.smmstore.com_buffer"
.It Va hw.coreboot.debug
Enable verbose coreboot diagnostics (read-write, default 0).
Tunable via
.Xr loader.conf 5
as
.Va hw.coreboot.debug .
.It Va hw.coreboot.version
Firmware version string.
.It Va hw.coreboot.build
Build date and time.
.It Va hw.coreboot.compile_time
Firmware compile time string.
.It Va hw.coreboot.compiler
Compiler identification string.
.It Va hw.coreboot.extra_version
Extra version information.
.It Va hw.coreboot.platform_blob_version
Platform blob version string.
.It Va hw.coreboot.serialno
Board serial number.
.It Va hw.coreboot.version_timestamp
Firmware version timestamp.
.It Va hw.coreboot.table_addr
Physical address of the coreboot table.
.It Va hw.coreboot.table_size
Total size of the coreboot table in bytes.
.It Va hw.coreboot.mainboard.vendor
Mainboard vendor name.
.It Va hw.coreboot.mainboard.part
Mainboard part number.
.It Va hw.coreboot.serial.baseaddr
Serial port base address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.serial.baud
Serial port baud rate.
.It Va hw.coreboot.serial.regwidth
Serial port register width.
.It Va hw.coreboot.tsc_freq_khz
TSC frequency in kilohertz as reported by firmware.
.It Va hw.coreboot.pcie_ctrl_base
PCIe controller base address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.acpi_rsdp
ACPI RSDP physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.board.fw_config
Firmware configuration bitmask.
.It Va hw.coreboot.board.board_id
Board ID.
.It Va hw.coreboot.board.ram_code
RAM code.
.It Va hw.coreboot.board.sku_id
SKU ID.
.It Va hw.coreboot.mac.N
Factory MAC address N (formatted as xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx).
.It Va hw.coreboot.boot_media.fmap_offset
FMAP offset from boot media start.
.It Va hw.coreboot.boot_media.cbfs_offset
CBFS offset from boot media start.
.It Va hw.coreboot.boot_media.cbfs_size
CBFS size in bytes.
.It Va hw.coreboot.boot_media.size
Boot media size in bytes.
.It Va hw.coreboot.mmc_early_cmd1_status
Early eMMC/MMC CMD1 status value.
.It Va hw.coreboot.spi_flash.size
SPI flash size in bytes.
.It Va hw.coreboot.spi_flash.sector_size
SPI flash sector size in bytes.
.It Va hw.coreboot.spi_flash.erase_cmd
SPI flash erase command byte.
.It Va hw.coreboot.console_type
Firmware console type (0=serial8250, 1=VGA, 2=BTEXT, 3=LOGBUF, 4=SROM,
5=EHCI, 6=serial8250mem).
.It Va hw.coreboot.framebuffer.addr
Framebuffer physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.framebuffer.x_res
Framebuffer horizontal resolution.
.It Va hw.coreboot.framebuffer.y_res
Framebuffer vertical resolution.
.It Va hw.coreboot.framebuffer.bpp
Framebuffer bits per pixel.
.It Va hw.coreboot.gpio.N.name
GPIO pin N name.
.It Va hw.coreboot.gpio.N.port
GPIO pin N port number.
.It Va hw.coreboot.gpio.N.value
GPIO pin N value.
.It Va hw.coreboot.gpio.N.polarity
GPIO pin N polarity.
.It Va hw.coreboot.tpm.version
TPM version (1=TPM 1.2, 2=TPM 2.0).
.It Va hw.coreboot.tpm.ppi_addr
TPM Physical Presence Interface address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.tpm.cblog_addr
TPM event log physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.smmstore.num_blocks
SMMSTORE v2 number of blocks.
.It Va hw.coreboot.smmstore.block_size
SMMSTORE v2 block size in bytes.
.It Va hw.coreboot.smmstore.mmap_addr
SMMSTORE v2 memory-mapped address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.smmstore.com_buffer
SMMSTORE v2 communication buffer address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.smmstore.apm_cmd
SMMSTORE v2 APM command byte.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem_refs.acpi_gnvs
ACPI GNVS CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem_refs.acpi_cnvs
ACPI CNVS CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem_refs.vpd
VPD CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem_refs.wifi_calibration
WiFi calibration CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem_refs.fmap
FMAP CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem_refs.vboot_workbuf
Vboot work buffer CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem_refs.type_c_info
Type-C info CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem_refs.root_bridge_info
Root bridge info CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.timestamps_addr
Timestamps CBMEM physical address.
.It Va hw.coreboot.timestamps
Formatted boot stage timing table (read-only).
Each line shows the timestamp ID, stage name, absolute time in
microseconds, and delta from the previous stage.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem.N.id
CBMEM entry ID.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem.N.name
Human-readable CBMEM entry name.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem.N.address
Physical address of the CBMEM entry.
.It Va hw.coreboot.cbmem.N.size
Size of the CBMEM entry in bytes.
.El
.Ss ioctl Interface
The
.Pa /dev/cbmem
device supports the following
.Xr ioctl 2
commands, defined in
.In dev/coreboot/coreboot_ioctl.h :
.Bl -tag -width CBMEM_IOC_LIST
.It Dv CBMEM_IOC_LIST
Returns a
.Vt struct cbmem_list
containing the count and metadata of all discovered CBMEM entries.
.It Dv CBMEM_IOC_READ
Reads data from a CBMEM entry identified by its ID.
Takes a
.Vt struct cbmem_read_req
specifying the entry ID, offset, size, and a userspace buffer.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/coreboot_console"
.It Pa /dev/coreboot_console
Firmware console ring buffer (read-only).
.It Pa /dev/cbmem
CBMEM entry access device.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Display the coreboot firmware version:
.Pp
.Dl "sysctl hw.coreboot.version"
.Pp
Read the firmware boot log:
.Pp
.Dl "cat /dev/coreboot_console"
.Pp
List all CBMEM entries:
.Pp
.Dl "sysctl hw.coreboot.cbmem"
.Pp
Show board identification:
.Pp
.Dl "sysctl hw.coreboot.board"
.Pp
Show factory MAC addresses:
.Pp
.Dl "sysctl hw.coreboot.mac"
.Pp
Display boot stage timestamps:
.Pp
.Dl "sysctl hw.coreboot.timestamps"
.Pp
Enable debug output and reload the module (the sysctl value resets on
unload, so it must be set again or persisted via
.Xr loader.conf 5 ) :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kldunload coreboot
kldload coreboot
sysctl hw.coreboot.debug=1
dmesg | grep coreboot
.Ed
.Pp
To persist debug across reboots, add to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.coreboot.debug=1
.Ed
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
The
.Nm
driver works with any x86 system running coreboot firmware.
The coreboot table format uses a stable ABI with forward-compatible
tagged records; unknown tags are safely skipped.
.Pp
Linux provides similar functionality through a custom bus type with
separate modules for each table record type, exposed via sysfs.
The
.Fx
driver uses a single module with native
.Xr sysctl 8
and
.Xr ioctl 2
interfaces instead.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr smbios 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 16.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Abdelkader Boudih Aq Mt freebsd@seuros.com .
.Sh CAVEATS
The driver discovers the coreboot table by scanning physical memory
addresses 0x0 through 0x1000 for the
.Dq LBIO
signature.
On systems without coreboot firmware, the driver will silently
not attach.
.Pp
The
.Pa /dev/coreboot_console
content is static after boot; coreboot does not write to the
console buffer after handing off control to the payload.
