.\"-
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Abdelkader Boudih <freebsd@seuros.com>
.\"
.Dd April 12, 2026
.Dt INTELTHERMAL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm intelthermal
.Nd Intel Processor Thermal Device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device intelthermal"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
intelthermal_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides read-only access to RAPL (Running Average Power Limit)
registers on Intel Skylake and later processors via
.Xr sysctl 8 .
.Pp
The driver attaches to the Processor Thermal Device (PCI device B0D4)
and exposes long-term (PL1) and short-term (PL2) power limits as well
as the Thermal Design Power (TDP).
Power values are reported in milliwatts.
.Pp
The RAPL power unit is read from MSR 0x606 at attach time.
If the MSR read fails, a default unit of 1/8\ W is used.
.Pp
If firmware has locked access to the MMIO registers, the driver
detects this condition at attach time and reports it via the
.Va access_denied
sysctl.
All power readings return zero when access is denied.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following device:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Intel Skylake Processor Thermal Device (PCI ID 0x8086:0x1903)
.El
.Pp
Other Intel processor generations may use different MMIO register
layouts and are not currently supported.
.Sh SYSCTLS
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.access_denied
Set to 1 if firmware has denied access to RAPL registers.
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.pl1
Long-term (PL1) power limit in milliwatts.
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.pl2
Short-term (PL2) power limit in milliwatts.
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.pl1_enabled
Set to 1 if the PL1 power limit is enabled.
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.pl2_enabled
Set to 1 if the PL2 power limit is enabled.
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.locked
Set to 1 if power limits are locked by firmware.
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.tdp
Thermal Design Power in milliwatts.
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.power_unit_div
Power unit divisor derived from MSR 0x606.
.It Va dev.intelthermal.%d.power_unit_shift
Power unit shift (bits 3:0 of MSR 0x606).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Pp
Intel 10th Gen Core Processor Datasheet, Volume 2.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 16.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Abdelkader Boudih Aq Mt freebsd@seuros.com
.Sh CAVEATS
Only Skylake Processor Thermal Device (0x1903) is supported.
Other processor generations have different register layouts and
require per-generation validation.
