.\"-
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Abdelkader Boudih <freebsd@seuros.com>
.\"
.Dd February 23, 2026
.Dt INTELPMC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm intelpmc
.Nd Intel PCH Power Management Controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device intelpmc"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
intelpmc_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver exposes sleep state residency counters and power gating status
for Intel Sunrise Point PCH (Platform Controller Hub) via
.Xr sysctl 8 .
.Pp
The driver supports debugging S0ix (Modern Standby) power states by
providing access to the cumulative time the system has spent in any
S0ix sub-state (S0i1, S0i2, S0i3).
.Pp
If firmware has locked access to the PMC registers, the driver detects
this condition at attach time and reports it via the
.Va access_denied
sysctl.
All register reads return zero when access is denied.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following devices:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Intel Sunrise Point-LP PMC (6th/7th Gen Core mobile, PCI ID 0x8086:0x9d21)
.It
Intel Sunrise Point-H PMC (6th/7th Gen Core desktop/server,
PCI ID 0x8086:0xa121)
.El
.Sh SYSCTLS
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.intelpmc.%d.access_denied
Set to 1 if firmware has denied access to PMC registers.
.It Va dev.intelpmc.%d.slp_s0_residency
Cumulative time the PCH SLP_S0 signal was asserted, in microseconds
(100\ us per step).
SLP_S0 is asserted only when all of the following conditions are
met simultaneously: CPU in Package C10, PCH in low power mode,
ModPhy lanes power-gated, and PLLs idle.
This represents the deepest achievable S0ix platform state.
A value that never advances indicates S0ix transitions are not
occurring.
.It Va dev.intelpmc.%d.ltr_ignore
Latency Tolerance Reporting (LTR) ignore mask.
.It Va dev.intelpmc.%d.pm_cfg
Power Management configuration register (PM_CFG).
.It Va dev.intelpmc.%d.pm_sts
Power Management status register (PM_STS).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpi 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Pp
Intel 100 Series Chipset Family PCH Datasheet, Volume 2, Section 4.3.53.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 16.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Abdelkader Boudih Aq Mt freebsd@seuros.com
.Sh CAVEATS
Only Sunrise Point PCH is supported.
Other PCH generations (Cannon Point, Tiger Lake, etc.) have different
register layouts and are not handled by this driver.
